**Group 4: Jiawei (Selina) Sun, Ming Zhou, Xinyu Zheng**

## The effectiveness and economic impacts of cap-and-trade programs in the U.S.

### 1. Introduction 

#### 1.1. Background and motivation
It is established by the United Nation that we are experiencing a climate emergency that has been threatening the lives, economy, health, and food to humanity. The concentration of greenhouse gases (GHG) in the atmosphere has significantly altered the composition of the atmosphere and has heated the average world temperature. Despite the consensus of reducing GHG emission, the gap between aspiration and reality is far from being achieved. The imperativeness and exigency of interventions becomes even more important if we were to realize the goal set forth by the Paris Agreement.

Multiple policy instruments have been developed to achieve the goal of reducing emissions. Unlike “command-and-control” approaches where governments use regulations to standardize or promulgate technology choices for individual facilities and businesses. Cap-and-trade program allows the market to set a price on carbon and that price drives investment decisions and spurs market innovations.

In a cap-and-trade system, the government would set an emission cap and issue a quantity of total emission allowances along with that cap. Emitters must hold allowances for every ton of greenhouse gas they emit. Allowances can be bought and sold for an emission price determined by the market. Companies therefore have been incentivized to reduce emission and control the cost by selling any excess allowances. Meanwhile, companies will face higher costs to buy the allowances if they fail to curb their emissions.

It's worth mentioning that cap-and-trade is the preferable policy tool to carbon tax when the government has a specified emission target. The distinction between cap-and-trade and a carbon tax lies in the level of predictability they provide with regards to emissions. Carbon taxes provide a definite cost for emissions; however, they do not provide a clear estimation of the levels of emissions that would result from that cost. Conversely, cap-and-trade programs establish a definite projection of future emissions, they do not establish a definite price for these emissions.

Being one of the highest per capita GHG emissions countries in the world, the United States has started to use market-driven policy tools like cap-and-trade schemes to incentivize GHG emission reduction. Twelve states that are home to over a quarter of the U.S. population and account for a third of U.S. GDP has instituted an active carbon-pricing program, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). Being the first mandatory cap-and-trade program, the program limits the carbon dioxide emissions from the power sector in the participating states. In 2013, California started to operate a cap-and-trade program that became the first multi-sector cap-and-trade program in North America. The program has been established and in action for more than a decade. 

Policy briefs and media commentary have generally portrayed this cap-and-trade program in a well-regarded manner. However, we must answer for the effectiveness and the impacts of the program before we push forward the cap-and-trade program as a nationwide policy. 
Thus in this proposal, we seek to evaluate the effectiveness of this ongoing cap-and-trade program in reducing carbon emissions and the program’s effect on the economy. 

#### 1.2. Problem Statements
In our research, we aim to evaluate the effect of cap-and-trade schemes on reducing carbon emissions and the economy using the difference-in-difference method. We thus have two research questions: (1) Is the cap-and-trade scheme effective in reducing carbon emissions in states that participated the RGGI and what economic impact does the scheme has; (2) Is the multi-sector cap-and-trade scheme in California more effective in reducing carbon emissions and having a wider impact on the economy compared to states that only applied cap-and-trade in the power sector?

### 2. Intervention 

#### 2.1 Market Failure 
A market failure refers to the inefficient distribution of resources that occurs when the individuals in a group end up worse off than if they had not acted in rational self-interest. For decades, many economists have taken climate change as a classical example of market failure. The core one is the so-called ‘greenhouse-gas externality’. It indicates that greenhouse gas emissions are an external effect of a range of economically valuable activities, including burning coal to generate electricity, burning petrol to power cars, producing food and disposing of waste. Most of the impacts of emissions would not fall on those conducting the activities, rather, they would fall on future generations or people living in low-income or middle-income countries. In other words, those who are responsible for the emissions do not pay the cost. The adverse effects of greenhouse gasses are therefore negative externalities to the whole society. Since there is no incentive for businesses and consumers to reduce emissions, the market fails by over-producing greenhouse gasses. Our intervention aims to create incentives in the market (on businesses mainly) to produce less greenhouse gasses, generating less deadweight loss and reaching market equilibrium. 

#### 2.2 Theory of Change 
Currently, the major greenhouse gas reduction policy approaches fall into three main categories: carbon pricing, technology subsidies, and performance standards. We choose  multi-sector cap and trade energy programs based on political feasibility and its long-term economic benefits. A cap and trade energy program is a common government regulatory program designed to limit or cap the total amount of emissions of carbon dioxide, as a result of industrial activity. It is a market system since it creates an exchange value for emissions. In general, the government would set the limit on emissions permitted across industries. It would issue a limited number of permits that allow companies to emit a certain amount of carbon dioxide. And the total amount of the cap will be split into allowances. Each allowance permits a company to emit one ton of emission. If a company wants to emit more greenhouse gasses than they are allotted, they must buy allowance credits from the state during an auction. The proceeds from these sanctions go toward other climate projects, such as land restoration and conservation. In this way, companies would be ‘taxed’ if they produce a higher level of emissions than their permits allow. The government may also lower permits each year, making it more expensive to emit. 

A cap and trade program offers an incentive for companies to reduce emissions by investing in cleaner technologies or funding research into alternative energy resources. It can also lead to faster cuts in emission.

Based on the theory of change, we have the null hypothesis that the emission levels, profitability, and employment are identical before and after implementing the cap and trade energy program and the alternative hypothesis that the emission levels, profitability, and employment are significantly different before and after implementing the cap and trade energy program. 

#### 2.3 Relevance
The local impacts of a cap and trade energy program can provide evidence in its effectiveness in reducing emissions in either long term or short term, and its effectiveness relative to the program in single sector (e.g., limiting to the energy sector), its impact in profitability and employment, empirical knowledge in setting the limits and caps, and the speed of lowering them. There are also other lessons for other institutions: 
* How substantial the revenue generated by auctioning its allowances will be， especially for the countries/states, where their governments are in budget deficits. 
* Empirical lessons in setting the ‘price’ of allowances in firms across sectors. 
* How a cap and trade energy program in carbon dioxide can be jointly implemented with other programs in local economies. 

### 3. Measurement

#### 3.1 Design:
**(Note: Suppose the time of this research design is 2006 when California passes its law of cap-and-trade)**

To test the efficiency of the multi-sector cap-and-trade program and its impact on the economy, we employ a Difference-in-Difference framework, comparing the facility-level CO2 emissions, profit, and employment in the state(s) will implement multi-sector cap-and-trade programs (treatment group) with those that will adopt single-sector programs and those will not (control group) before and after the implementation of programs in the treatment group. If the difference in CO2 emissions, profit, and new employment between the treatment group and control group after the implementation of cap-and-trade programs significantly changes compared to the difference before the implementation, we have evidence to support the validity of the multi-sector cap-and-trade program and the existence its impact on probability and employment.

In total, eleven states in the US will adopt carbon pricing policies. Ten will launch the cap-and-trade programs in 2009 under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), targeting the energy sector only. California is the only state in North America that passed a law of multi-sector cap-and-trade and will launch in 2013, covering virtually all economic sectors. To be able to analyze the validity of a multi-sector cap-and-trade program,  California is the only choice of treatment group. We select two control groups from two folds of states without multi-sector cap-and-trade schemes implemented, respectively. First, XXX, one of the rest of states having not passed a cap-and-trade law of any design, enables us to answer the first research question - whether a cap-and-trade program is effective and if there is any impact on the economy; second, XXX, one of the ten states under RGGI that will adopt programs focusing on a single sector, enables us to answer the second research question - if multi-sector cap-and-trade programs are superior over single-sector ones in CO2 reduction and to compare the scope of impact on profitability and employment.

#### 3.2 Data:
We set the unit of analysis as facilities, and thus the population is all facilities in all economic sectors in the states of our interests. As explained in 3.1, the efficiency of cap-and-trade programs and their economic impacts is measured by comparing the reduction in CO2 emissions by facilities and their changes in profitability and employment between treatment and control groups. Thus, we plan to ask facilities to self-report their CO2 emissions, profit, and employment through a survey. Considering the high costs that will incur when the survey covers the whole population for years, we plan to stratify the population by main sectors classified based on the North American Classification Industry Classification System and randomly sample facilities in each stratum from the complete list of facilities. Based on the Difference-in-Differences framework, this survey will be collected annually from sampled facilities from 2006 to 2016.

#### 3.3 Complications:
This study will collect surveys from 2006 to 2016 and start analysis in 2017 when the data collecting encloses. We anticipate that the first draft of results will be available at the end of 2017.
The followings are the issues and complications we foresee:
* Low response rate: facilities might not be willing to respond to the survey leading to some missing values
* Selection bias: if the missing values are systematic, for example, large emitters or facilities in specific industries incline not to answer questions, analysis based on the non-missing values is biased
* Attrition: as this survey will last for years, sample facilities might close or not respond to the survey during the analysis period.
* Measurement error: self-reported data is subjective. For example, major emitters might underreport their CO2 emissions.
