# Data Quality Checks

Our survey project is particularly vulnerable to possible respondent errors, of which some are only identifiable via quality data checks. Survey respondents may inadvertently enter incorrect data, such as negative values for positive-only metrics (e.g., salaries) or data that renders large outliers; perhaps, for example, a respondent adds an extra zero in their salary. These errors can be remedied by restricting survey responses to particular sets of numbers or values and by constraining the survey questions to reasonably, knowable information (e.g., the survey shouldn’t ask for difficult-to-recall information). If outlying errors like these make their way into the collected dataset, data checks may be able to catch them. For example, Stata code can flag outliers for further inspection. At the same time, measurement errors can be more subtle and less obvious. For example, a survey respondent may slightly misreport their salary. These small deviations from the true values are often too small to catch.

Another way to identify potential data issues is to measure the survey start and end times. It is imperative to have an accurate understanding of when exactly enumerators are surveying participants, as well as for how long enumerators are interviewing participants. Surveys can also have built-in various attention checks to ensure that survey respondents are providing quality data. Completion time data provide a retrospective check. Analysis of survey times can also identify what questions were the most challenging for respondents. This data check may help identify respondents that completed the survey impossibly fast or took a longer time on questions, which could indicate that they struggled to respond with particular information.

Another possible quality issue is the incorrect or incomplete deployment of surveys across the target population and area. For example, in this project, the accuracy of results requires comparable response rates from regions of different distances from new metro stations. Data quality checks can identify whether the number of deployed surveys or response rates vary systematically across regions. Large differences may indicate an issue in the deployment of surveys and sources of non-response bias.

