Maeve Grady, Emma Nyhof, Marlyn Bruno

## Introduction

The United States has 2.5 million fewer people in the labor force compared to pre-pandemic trends.<sup>1</sup> As help wanted signs appear in windows, today’s staggering labor shortages appear in headlines with increasing alarm. Despite these conditions, the US continues to deport tens of thousands of undocumented immigrants annually. Given legal status, this population could fill the gaps across industries that the  current economy faces. However, legal immigration restrictions have created an inefficiency prohibiting a traditionally labor-seeking population from safely entering the US labor market.

According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, there were 10,441 million job openings in November, 2022, just weeks after the Biden Administration chose to expand Title 42, the pandemic era regulation allowing immediate deportation to Mexico for immigrants from many Central and South American countries. 2.1 million jobs remained vacant in education and health services while  1.9  million jobs remained open in leisure and  hospitality.<sup>2</sup> In comparison, there were only 432 thousand and  797 thousand unemployed in each industry; gaps of 1.7 million  and 1.1 million needed workers respectively. 

A hot labor market means a lot of things including increased bargaining power, higher employment turnover rates but also a lot of burnout in the workplace. Workplace burnout is propelled by labor shortages,<sup>3</sup> and can lead to poor working conditions and even more turnover. In this market, many employers have chosen to raise wages, but some have found that increased wages are insufficient to fully restore a workforce and economists are concerned about the impact of raising wages on inflation. Despite these stop-gap measures, many economists agree that additional workers are necessary and an obvious group that could fill this gap are undocumented immigrants.  

There are some pathways for legal residential and work status inside the US. Of note to this study in particular is  the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, which gives qualifying immigrants who arrived as children protection from deportation and a work permit that must be renewed every two years. Approximately 1.8 million people are eligible for DACA and about 800,000 are enrolled in the program. One key requirement of the program is that to be eligible, applicants must have been under the age of 31 on June 15, 2012. Effectively this created a unique treatment (DACA-eligible and therefore work-eligible) and control (not eligible for work permit) group that we propose to utilize in this study. We expect outcomes of this study to have external validity with most undocumented immigrant populations in the US. We also expect to discuss the implications of expanded work permits  for undocumented immigrants on US Labor Vacancies and other measures of US workforce participation.


## Intervention

Adjusting immigration policy is a clear solution to the widespread labor shortages being experienced in many sectors in recent years. Not all immigrants come to the US to work, but immigrants that are deported to Mexico are overwhelmingly young - 90% between 15 and 39 and 65% between 15 and 29.<sup>4</sup> One survey found that of recently deported workers whose stay in the US was long enough to work, many worked in the fields in which the US currently is experiencing labor shortages. Two UC Davis economists have noted that sectors that tend to rely on immigrant labor had significantly higher rates of vacant filled jobs in 2021.<sup>5</sup> Despite increasing efforts to stem the flow of immigrants at the southern border, recent years have seen record numbers of people attempting to cross the US-Mexico border.<sup>6</sup>  The financial costs alone that immigrants often incur to attempt to enter the United States suggests that residence and work in the US are highly desirable to this population.  Granting work authorization to undocumented immigrants would likely increase labor supply such that  shortages could potentially shrink or even disappear altogether. 

In order to measure the effects of this policy change the adoption of DACA will be used as the intervention. As previously mentioned, eligibility for this program was based on an individual’s age on an arbitrary date, which will allow us to look at differences in outcomes for those clustered on either side of this threshold. In particular, we will focus on labor market and economic outcomes such as labor force participation, hours worked, income, and whether or not the individual is in a high-skill occupation. Given that this was a national policy, the findings will apply broadly to undocumented immigrants in the United States. These findings could also be applied to immigration policy more generally. More specifically, these findings could provide reasonable evidence that loosening immigration restrictions moving forward is a promising solution towards preventing labor shortages. 

## Measurement 

We will be using micro-level data to conduct a regression discontinuity design. To be eligible for DACA, an applicant must have been under the age of 31 as of June 15, 2012.<sup>7</sup> The arbitrariness of the eligibility threshold lends itself to a strong regression discontinuity design. The research population are undocumented immigrants in the U.S. who arrived as children. The treatment group are people who are DACA-eligible and the comparison group would be undocumented adults who arrived as children but are ineligible for DACA as they were 31 or older as of June 15, 2012. In this design, eligibility is determined by a person’s birthdate (if an individual was born on or after June 16, 1981). 

We’ll be looking at the intent-to-treat effect on labor participation. We’ll be creating a binary variable for each individual (i.e. 1 if employed, 0 if not), and see if labor participation is different between the treatment and comparison group before and after the DOB threshold. Since DACA was intended to give undocumented young adults opportunities to pursue employment in sectors they are skilled for but for which they lack work authorization, we’ll also want to include a binary variable for high-skill occupation (occupations that typically require a four-year college degree). On top of that, we’ll want to look at weekly hours worked and income to see if there are differences in the pre- and post-DACA values between treatment and comparison. Importantly, we would also like to do subgroup analyses to assess whether DACA affected labor participation differently for workers based on their nationality or work industry.

We’ll collect information from administrative data and from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for years before and after 2012. We’d be able to use the IPUMS website to download our variables of interest. We foresee two complications may arise: a lack of statistical power as a result of the regression discontinuity design (focusing on the observations around the eligibility threshold), and not having data on an individual’s birthdate. However, if either complication arises, we will be able to pivot to a difference-in-differences research design, which can circumvent both challenges. 

Overall, since our research will be using existing data, we would first have to determine what covariates to include in our model. We would have to do an overview of the existing literature and this would take about two weeks. Afterwards, we would have to see if all our covariates and outcomes are available on CPS or if we have to look at alternative datasets for some variables (two weeks). Afterwards, we’d download the year samples from the CPS and transform our variables. This would take an estimated month. Afterwards, we would experiment with getting the right functional form of our model. Overall, we estimate the analysis portion of our research project would take about 2 months. 

### References
1. Bhattarai, Abha. Washington Post. “Worker Shortages Are Fueling America’s Biggest Labor Crises,” September 16, 2022. [https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/09/16/worker-shortage-strikes-economy/](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/09/16/worker-shortage-strikes-economy/).
2. “Table 1. Job Openings Levels and Rates by Industry and Region, Seasonally Adjusted - 2022 M12 Results.” Accessed February 6, 2023. [https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t01.htm](https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t01.htm).
3. Bhattarai, Abha. (2022) 
4. Casas-Alatriste, Dany Bahar and Pedro. “Who Are the 1 Million Missing Workers That Could Solve America’s Labor Shortages?” Brookings (blog), July 14, 2022. [https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2022/07/14/who-are-the-1-million-missing-workers-that-could-solve-americas-labor-shortages/](https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2022/07/14/who-are-the-1-million-missing-workers-that-could-solve-americas-labor-shortages/).
5. “America’s Labor Shortage Is Actually an Immigrant Shortage,” April 8, 2022. [https://www.cbsnews.com/news/immigration-jobs-workers-labor-shortage/](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/immigration-jobs-workers-labor-shortage/).
6. Soto, Ariel G. Ruiz. “Record-Breaking Migrant Encounters at the U.S.-Mexico Border Overlook the Bigger Story.” migrationpolicy.org, October 16, 2022. [https://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/2022-record-migrant-encounters-us-mexico-border](https://www.migrationpolicy.org/news/2022-record-migrant-encounters-us-mexico-border).
7. U.S Citizenship & Immigration Services. [https://www.uscis.gov/humanitarian/consideration-of-deferred-action-for-childhood-arrivals-daca/frequently-asked-questions](https://www.uscis.gov/humanitarian/consideration-of-deferred-action-for-childhood-arrivals-daca/frequently-asked-questions).
